---
title: Documentation Update
description:
  Documentation is hard. You have to strike a balance between what's useful and what's excessive;
  and organize it in a way that is equally clear and easy to search.
date: 2025-10-01
authors: [jdolle]
---

In this update, rather than focus on new features of Hive, we'll be highlighting some of our
thoughts and reasoning for as well as strategies applied in the recent changes to the
[Hive documentation](/docs).

It feels a bit silly to be posting an update about documentation, but it's important as open source
developers to treat documentation as an extension of our code. Documentation gives a place to
explain things in far more detail or to a specific audience. It would be impossible to convey such
detail through the user interface or API alone.

So what motivated us to take a closer look at our documentation?

### A fundamental shift in how we think about Hive

Hive started as "only" a schema registry. We weren't sure what direction this would go in the
future, but thought features would keep being added to the core product. We also knew people needed
to be able to self-host Hive. So this lead to a common industry distinction of "cloud" vs
"self-hosting" offerings.

At the time, this made sense. GraphQL Federation was still young and GraphQL routers in their
infancy. But Federation was growing and the need for a powerful and customizable router was clear.
We knew it needed to work well with our schema registry also, and to make that point clear to
others, this router was called Hive Gateway. More recently, our offerings have expanded to include a
Hive Logger, built with our logging needs and best practices in mind, and soon a new Hive Router,
written in Rust.

**Hive is growing...**

Our suite is growing and it's become confusing to talk about "Hive" as a cloud service, since these
products span different spaces. What was once called "Hive" is now a part of the whole. The schema
registry has expanded as expected, but so has the brand. And so we needed to adapt.

This has been a very organic process for us. Which honestly is great because we can find gaps in the
GraphQL ecosystem, work on solutions, and let our work inform our brand. We can be sure that we're
building solutions to real problems because of this, but our documentation had some growing pains as
a result.

### Input from the community

Feedback and questions from the community have made the shortcomings of our documentation even more
clear. There was often confusion around cloud hosting our Gateway (which we don't offer, at least at
this time). Additionally, our API Reference documentation was scattered and we'd often get questions
about how to do certain custom tasks.

Rather than get annoyed any time a question is asked more than once, it's best to take a look at the
cause. 99% of the time it's because the documentation is missing, hard to find, or generally
unclear.

### Industry changes

GraphQL has been changing this whole time as well. As mentioned before, Federation was new when Hive
was first built. People are much more familiar with the concepts of Federation now and it's been
gradually shifting from a single company's offering (Apollo Federation) to an
[open spec](https://open-federation.org/) (GraphQL Federation). So terminology needs updated.

## What we did

### Let the products speak

We updated the [introduction/landing page](https://the-guild.dev/graphql/hive/docs) to instantly
showcase our product offerings. This makes it clear that these are modular, pieces of the whole, and
gives us a fantastic place to briefly introduce each. Additionally, since Hive Console was the only
product in the past, there were a lot of documents that were specific to Hive Console that were
still at the root of the Hive documentation. This was solved by creating separate pages for each
product and moving these pages inside.

### Collapse when possible

Previously there were separate root level pages for CLI/API References, Specifications, and our
public GraphQL API. This was because we thought each had a separate audience and were conceptually
different, but what we've discovered is that if people are looking at reference documentation, then
they likely care about all of this. The audience for all of these sections included "power users",
who wanted to write custom tools or interfaces for Hive. So we collapsed all of this to a single
location, making it easier for power users to browse for what they need. -- And this is just one
instance. There were (and probably still are) numerous parts of our documentation that were
redundant.

## Conclusion

Much like our code bases, documentation ages. Not only because of UI or API changes, but because the
entire product or the world around it might change. Staying organized helps since pages are more
searchable, but documentation is often too easy to forget to update.

Hopefully you've found this post interesting and learned a little more about Hive in the process. I
have no doubt that our documentation will continue to evolve alongside Hive moving forward. And if
you see something that doesn't make sense, don't hesitate to ask. There's no such thing as a stupid
question -- there's only neglected documentation.

---

[Check out the latest Hive documentation](/docs)
